As panic gripped the Kashmir Valley after the Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) government's security advisory on Friday, the tourists and the Amarnath Yatra pilgrims started leaving the Kashmir Valley on Saturday, even as J&K Governor Satya Pal Malik said there is no need to panic. The airfares of the airlines rising to abnormally high levels also created panic among the tourists and the Amarnath Yatra pilgrims.
Satya Pal Malik urged the political delegations led by National Conference leader Omar Abdullah and PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti to tell their supporters to maintain calm and not to believe "exaggerated rumours" being circulated in the Valley.
Asserting that the "situation in Kashmir is normal", the J&K Governor said that unnecessary panic is being created in Kashmir by some of the political parties. Satya Pal Malik also said that rumour mongering is a routine in J&K.
However, despite the Governor's assurances the Congress and the National Conference indicated that they would seek clarifications from the Centre when Parliament meets again on Monday.
KASHMIR TERROR ALERT: TOP DEVELOPMENTS
1. A day after the advisory, the Indian Air Force flights were pressed into service to airlift the Amarnath yatris home. Immediately after the advisory was issued, the Jammu and Kashmir Tourism Department sent buses to different tourist destinations to evacuate the tourists back to Srinagar. When the advisory was issued, there were about 20,000-22,000 tourists in Kashmir.
The sudden turn of events has left many unhappy, including the business community. "I have been visiting Kashmir for past so many years, but have never seen such an irresponsible behaviour by the government," Anil Verma, a tourist from Delhi, said. Haryana's Ramesh Kumar said the government order was "unprecedented".
2. Amid rumours of plans to repeal Articles 370 and 35A or the state's trifurcation, the Governor said in a statement that the state has no knowledge of any changes to constitutional provisions. On the confusion triggered by the security advisory, Satya Pal Malik said that "a pure security measure" is being mixed up with issues with which it has no connection.
"That is the cause of the panic," he said, according to the Raj Bhavan.
3. Soon after the tourists and the Amarnath pilgrims were asked to leave the Valley, airfares for flights from Srinagar shot up to abnormally high levels with tickets for a two-hour flight costing as high as Rs 10,000.
As the Amarnath Yatra pilgrims complained of the high airfares, the Ministry of Civil Aviation said that it has asked all the airlines to control the surging airfares for the pilgrims returning from Amarnath Yatra.
Meanwhile, the railways has announced that no cancellation fee will be charged till Tuesday morning if the passengers cancel reserved tickets booked for their journey originating from Jammu, Katra and Uddhampur stations.
4. According to the Airports Authority of India (AAI), 6,126 passengers reported at the Srinagar International Airport on Saturday to travel out of the Kashmir Valley. Out of 6,126, a total of 5,829 passengers travelled by 32 scheduled flights. The rest 387 passengers, AAI said, were accommodated in an IAF aircraft. The passengers were flown to various destinations such as Jammu, Pathankot, and Hindon.
5. A day after Amarnath Yatra was curtailed by the J&K government, the 'Machail Yatra' to Goddess Durga shrine in Kishtwar district was also suspended. "Machail Yatra to Goddess Durga shrine in Kishtwar district of Jammu & Kashmir has been suspended," said Angrez Singh Rana, District Commissioner, Kishtwar.
6. Even though the Governor assured the political parties that the situation in the Valley was normal and the advisory had no connection with J&K's special status, Mehbooba Mufti urged all the political parties in the state to come together to give a message to the central government that they cannot tamper with the state's special position.
Omar Abdullah also demanded the Centre to come forward and assure people of Kashmir that there is nothing to worry about.
7. As there was no official word from the Central government, Congress leaders slammed the government for the security advisory which asked Amarnath Yatra pilgrims and the tourists to leave the Valley and said that the pilgrimage was never stopped even during the height of terrorism in the state.
Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad said that the pilgrimage was never stopped or the tourists in the Kashmir Valley were never asked to go back during the previous governments in Jammu and Kashmir. Questioning the recent advisory of troop build-up in the state, he asserted that the situation in the Valley is "worrying" and the deployment of the additional forces is a "matter of concern".
8. As the events unfolded during the day with the NC, PDP and the Congress accusing the Central government of spreading fear in the Valley, the BJP's J&K unit said that the political parties in Kashmir and the Congress were "deliberately trying to trigger panic as they themselves are frightened".
"The common man has no fear and under the leadership of Modi, every common citizen is safe in the country," BJP's state president Ravinder Raina said.
9. A day after the security advisory created among the locals in Kashmir, the United Kingdom, Germany and Australia issued a travel advisory for its citizens and asked them to not travel to J&K. While the UK government has asked its citizens to "remain vigilant", Germany's advisory "strongly discourages travel to Kashmir" and that of Australia's advised "against all travel to J&K".
10. Meanwhile, the government has issued an advisory for the officers, asking them to not leave their respective stations "under any circumstances" as "tension may escalate with Pakistan in Kargil".
The advisory read: "All district officers, sub-divisional magistrates, tehsildars and other sectoral officers are hereby directed not to leave their respective stations under any circumstances without prior approval of the district magistrate/deputy commissioner, Kargil. No officer shall keep his/her mobile on switched off mode."