Overnight rains and heavy showers in the morning yet again disrupted mundane lives of Mumbaikars. The continuous downpour in Mumbai since last night had led to severe water-logging and flooding at several places in the city.
Train services in the Central and Harbour line were severely impacted, while flight operations at Mumbai airport were delayed for some time. In a rare view, people were seen walking on tracks. Flights at Mumbai international Airport were also delayed.
Nonetheless, the incessant rains accompanied with high tides had turned the city of dreams into a dumping ground for garbage. Here's all that happened today in Mumbai amid rainfall, floods and water-logging.
1. After the weather department had predicted intense spells of rain in Mumbai, the state police had issued an advisory requesting Mumbaikars to take adequate precautions and ensure safety.
2. Around 11 flights were affected at Mumbai airport due to heavy rains, including five arrivals and five departure flight. Railway lines were also severely affected for few hours. Services were temporarily suspended between CSMT-Vashi on harbour line and CSMT-Thane on main line.
3. The rainfall near Mauje Dhamandevi village in Raigarh had caused a landslide in the area following which the Mumbai-Goa national highway in Maharashtra was shut for traffic. The whole stretch was closed while the road-clearing operation was underway.
4. Even as heavy rains played havoc in the city, high tides were yet to come. The IMD, later in the day, had cautioned people, saying that heavy rainfall warning on a "very-high-tide day" (Saturday) is "not a good combination".
5. Following the caution issued, the Mumbai police stepped up to request Mumbaikars to stay away from the sea. They also provided people with a number to call at the time of emergency or any kind of support.
6. The IMD then issued a red alert for west and central Maharashtra till Sunday. In the evening, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) issued red alert for Palghar, Thane, Raigad, Nasik, Pune, and Satara districts for August 3-4 and Mumbai for August 3.
7. The Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation on Saturday issued advisory asking Mumbai residents to not venture into the sea or in water-logged areas in view of the IMD warning. It also declared a holiday for schools and colleges in the city.
8. Around 11 flights were affected at Mumbai airport due to heavy rains, including five arrivals and five departure flight. Railway lines were also severely affected for few hours. Services were temporarily suspended between CSMT-Vashi on harbour line and CSMT-Thane on main line due to rains coinciding with high tide.
9. In one of the rain-related accidents in the city today, a man was rescued from a flooded area in Talkuteshwar Ghat after people made a lifeline out of sarees.
10. In another incident, four people had drowned in Pandavkada waterfall in Kharghar of Navi Mumbai on Saturday. In yet another case, a person was electrocuted in Thane city. On top of this, some people had suffered serious injuries after the roof of a bakery collapsed in Mumbra in the district.
11. Meanwhile, heavy rains in Nashik in Maharashtra and release of water from Gangapur Dam on Saturday caused the Godavari river to flow above the danger mark. An official said that 17,748 cusecs (cubic foot per second) of water were released leading to the level of the river reaching almost to the deck of Holkar Bridge. Not just this, several cusecs of water were released into various rivers from Gautami, Alandi, Bhavali, Waldevi, Palkhed, Chankapur, Punad and Haranbari dams, the official said.
12. What the IMD had called "not a good combination" raised environmental concerns in Mumbai today. The high tides had sent back the garbage thrown in the sea and coastal areas back to the city. Around 143 metric tonnes of garbage were collected from the coastal areas, Chowpatty and beaches after the high tide.
