“Your problem is to bridge the gap which exists between where you are now and the goal you intend to reach.”—Earl Nightingale
I recall a passage my father often used growing up in 1990s: “Don’t tell me your problems unless you’ve spent weeks trying to solve them yourself.” That advice has echoed in my mind for decades and became my motivator. Don’t leave it to other people or outside circumstances to motivate you because you will be let down every time. It must come from within you. Gnaw away at your problems until you solve them or find a solution. Problems are not stop signs, they are advising you that more work is required to overcome them. Most times, problems help you gain a skill or develop the resources to succeed later. So embrace your challenges and develop the grit to push past them instead of retreat in resignation. Where are you settling in your life right now? Could you be you playing for bigger stakes than you are? Are you willing to play bigger even if it means repeated failures and setbacks? You should ask yourself these questions to decide whether you’re willing to put yourself on the line or settle for less. And that’s fine if you’re content to receive less, as long as you’re not regretful later.

If you have not achieved the success you deserve and are considering giving up, will you regret it in a few years or decades from now? Only you can answer that, but you should carve out time to discover your motivation for pursuing your goals. It’s a fact, if you don’t know what you want you’ll get what life hands you and it may not be in your best interest, affirms author Larry Weidel: “Winners know that if you don’t figure out what you want, you’ll get whatever life hands you.” The key is to develop a powerful vision of what you want and hold that image in your mind. Nurture it daily and give it life by taking purposeful action towards it.
Vision + desire + dedication + patience + daily action leads to astonishing success. Are you willing to commit to this way of life or jump ship at the first sign of failure? I’m amused when I read questions written by millennials on Quora who ask how they can become rich and famous or the next Elon Musk. Success is a fickle and long game with highs and lows. Similarly, there are no assurances even if you’re an overnight sensation, to sustain it for long, particularly if you don’t have the mental and emotional means to endure it. This means you must rely on the one true constant in your favour: your personal development. The more you grow, the more you gain in terms of financial resources, status, success—simple. If you leave it to outside conditions to dictate your circumstances, you are rolling the dice on your future.
So become intentional on what you want out of life. Commit to it. Nurture your dreams. Focus on your development and if you want to give up, know what’s involved before you take the plunge. Because I assure you, someone out there right now is working harder than you, reading more books, sleeping less and sacrificing all they have to realise their dreams and it may contest with yours. Don’t leave your dreams to chance.
